cycle / instret / time -- why and how

--- why bother? ---


Chapter 7 "Zicntr and Zihpm Extensions for Counters", p.51:

  "We recommend provision of these basic counters in implementations as
  they are essential for basic performance analysis, adaptive and dynamic
  optimization, and to allow an application to work with real-time
  streams."

Practically: any real software that profiles itself, adapts its own
behavior based on timing, or just checks "how long did that take" reads
one of these three CSRs. 

--- what they are, and their addresses ---

Table 4 "Currently allocated RISC-V unprivileged CSR addresses",

  0xC00  URO  cycle    Cycle counter for RDCYCLE instruction.
  0xC01  URO  time     Timer for RDTIME instruction.
  0xC02  URO  instret  Instructions-retired counter for RDINSTRET instruction.

All three URO ("User Read-Only") -- accessible from any mode, read-only.
Check this against the *existing* generic privilege logic in
CSRState::write before assuming anything new is needed there: 0xC00's
bits[11:10] = 0b11 (read-only) and bits[9:8] = 0b00 (U-level). Both already
match what CSRState::write's existing checks enforce. no changes needed
to the read-only/privilege-gating logic itself. Same for 0xC01/0xC02 (same
top bits, only the low byte differs). The only thing actually missing is
that the *value* returned by .read() at these addresses needs to be a live
count, not static storage.

RV32 splits each into a low half (the addresses above) and a high half
(cycleh=0xC80, timeh=0xC81, instreth=0xC82, same table) to represent one
64-bit counter across two 32-bit CSRs. Starting with just the low half and
letting it wrap at 2^32 is a reasonable first simplification -- the spec's
own concern about needing 64 bits is "software cannot determine if values
have overflowed" (p.51), which matters for real long-running systems, not
for a toy emulator's first pass. 

--- what each one actually counts ---

cycle (p.52): "the number of clock cycles executed by the processor core
...from an arbitrary start time in the past." This emulator has no notion
of multi-cycle instructions at all. 
Suggestion:
1 cycle per step() call, incremented unconditionally (a trap still "costs"
a cycle, same as real hardware attempting the instruction).

instret (p.61, Section 3.3): increments once per instruction that
*retires* and NOT every instruction actually retires. 
Exact quote:
  "As ECALL and EBREAK cause synchronous exceptions, they are not
  considered to retire, and should not increment the minstret CSR."
And more generally (p.68): "instructions that cause synchronous exceptions
...are not considered to retire, and hence do not increment instret."
So: increment instret only on perform_step's success (Ok) path in
core.rs's step(), not when a trap fires. cycle increments regardless;
instret is conditional on this exact distinction.

time (p.52): wall-clock real time, meant to mirror the platform's mtime
register (the same mtime that drives timer interrupts -- item #8). A
proper implementation ties this to the interrupt-timer mechanism, which
doesn't exist yet. But the spec explicitly allows a simpler stand-in
(p.52, info box): "On some simple platforms, cycle count might represent
a valid implementation of RDTIME, in which case RDTIME and RDCYCLE may
return the same result." So for now: time can just alias cycle's value.
Revisit once item #8 (interrupts/mtime) actually exists.

--- the design wrinkle ---

CSRState::write's existing read-only check is *unconditional*, it
rejects any write where bits[11:10]=0b11, regardless of who's writing or
why:

  let valid_write_access = (address >> 10) & 0b11 != 0b11;

That's correct for *instructions* trying to write these CSRs (they should
be rejected -- that's the whole point of URO). But it also means the
emulator's own internal bookkeeping -- incrementing cycle/instret each
step -- can't go through the normal public .write() method either; it
would get rejected by the same check. This mirrors a real distinction:
"read-only from software's perspective" doesn't mean the hardware itself
can't update the value -- the counter increments through a completely
different, internal path that never goes through the CSR write port real
instructions use.

So this needs a separate, internal-only way to update these three
addresses -- something that bypasses the read-only check on purpose (e.g.
a method that writes directly to storage without going through the normal
permission logic), used only from core.rs's step(), never reachable from
instruction execution. Same category of thing as set_mepc/set_mcause/etc.
already being internal-only, privileged bookkeeping -- just needs its own
bypass since csrrw et al. would (correctly) still refuse to touch these
addresses.

--- where the increment logic goes ---

core.rs's step(), after perform_step(cpu) resolves:
  - cycle (and time, aliased) increments every single call, Ok or Err.
  - instret increments only on the Ok branch.
